---
layout: post
title: BioAid Meets Life
date: 2013-07-20 13:10:56.000000000 +04:00
type: post
parent_id: '0'
published: true
password: ''
status: publish
categories: []
tags:
- BioAid
- DIY
- hearing
- hearing aids
- iOS
- iPhone
- review
- science
- software
- technology
meta:
  _edit_last: '10080708'
  geo_public: '1'
  _publicize_pending: '1'
  geo_latitude: '55.752220'
  geo_longitude: '37.615560'
  geo_address: Moscow, Moscow City, Russian Federation
  tagazine-media: a:7:{s:7:"primary";s:0:"";s:6:"images";a:0:{}s:6:"videos";a:0:{}s:11:"image_count";i:0;s:6:"author";s:8:"10080708";s:7:"blog_id";s:8:"54975529";s:9:"mod_stamp";s:19:"2013-07-20
    13:16:18";}
  geo_accuracy: '0'
  _oxford-post-cache: a:1:{s:15:"featured-images";a:0:{}}
author:
  login: wswld
  email: seva17@gmail.com
  display_name: wswld
  first_name: ''
  last_name: ''
---

Couple of weeks ago me and my wife went to a hearing aid center for a free 
consultation before, perhaps, buying a new hearing aid. The previous one has 
been working just fine for five years or more and it has became unusable 
lately. In the center they have run all the ususal tests, created an audiogram 
and offered a couple variants to choose from. I was satisfied with the devices, 
however I haven't recognized any major difference from the one, that I already 
had. I was hoping to manage with $600-$500, and I was shocked when they named 
their price: even the cheapest of the devices was around $1000. We could afford 
it, but I declined.

Being a person with inborn defect of the auditory nerve, I'm wearing a BTE 
hearing aid all my life since the early childhood and I still remember the day, 
when I put the thing on for the first time. For a boy, who haven't been hearing 
the sounds of footsteps on asphalt or the birds twittering, etc, it was a 
marvelous to discover all those sounds for the first time. Later in life, when 
I was wearing my fifth of sixth pair of hearing aids this wonderful piece of 
technology was already taken for granted and I was actively using it in school, 
university and later — in the workplace. Gradually, I started to recognize 
quite a few shortcomings of modern hearing aids:

1. Most doctors would suggest you wear aids on both ears, since it is really 
   good at helping you to locate the sound and experience the stereo or 3D 
   hearing. Wearing two devices may be considered tempting if you don't do 
   anything else with your ears like using a phone, headphones and participating 
   in all the different kinds of intense activities (*sport?*), when people may 
   unwillingly flick it off. It's a physical inconvenience of having something 
   plugged into your ear that is not that simple to take off, but paradoxically 
   simple to drop. People using them day-to-day would understand, what I'm 
   talking about. Headphones and phone would also require you to take the aid 
   off first and don't get me started on the horrible phone regime, which is 
   available in most modern aids. This was actually how I lost one of my aids: I 
   needed to use a phone, took it off and missed my pocket. Never saw that 
   device again.
2. Whistling. Yes, they are constantly whistling and it is a curse upon the 
   people with limited hearing. They whistle even more as the plastic ear mold 
   of the aid is wearing off, which means that ideally it should be replaced 
   every year. Whistling is produced by the mic and the speaker in the ear mold 
   since they are too close to each other and the feedback sound is being 
   produced. Ideally the ear mold should hermetically fit in the ear, to avoid 
   the feedback, but at times it sticks out anyway, and when it does — it's 
   close to unbearable.
3. Close sourced software and hardware parts. This industry is controlled by a 
   bunch of electronics industry giants (Siemens, Phonak, etc) and they became 
   to some extent monopolistic in this market, since only they had the initial 
   resources to support research and production of hearing aids. Of course they 
   are laying out all the rules now, which leads us to the fourth and the worst 
   limitation of all.
4. The price. These devices are pricey as hell. It's a mic, a little processor 
   and a speaker. Yeah, the size is super-small, but it doesn't add up to 
   $1500-$2000 in my head, sorry. It's just immensely overpriced. I'm not a 
   cheap guy, but I do have a problem when people feed me up with "*magic*" and 
   as I work in technology, I know that such claims are almost 100% marketing 
   and outright bullshit. They know that most of us — the hearing impaired 
   don't have a choice and we're forced to pay twice as much money for anything 
   they come up with. If you look for the last ten years — they are going round 
   in circles. Hearing aids haven't seen any revolutionary improvement for 
   decades, compared with the booming technology market in consumer electronics 
   and it's just sad.

Considering all the above, there is great demand for some open solution in the 
market. Something you could thinker with yourself and use as a temporary or 
permanent substitution for a commercial hearing aid. To achieve that, it should 
be capable not only of recording, amplifying and reproducing the sound, but it 
also should be smart enough to amplify only some frequency ranges, depending on 
type and severity of the hearing damage. It would need some computational power 
to process the sound. Ideally, it should also analyze the sound and get rid of 
background noise, while normalizing the rest of it (making it quieter or louder 
depending on the context). Modern smartphones are perfect candidates, since 
they have everything we need in a hearing aid. I started looking for solutions 
available as an iPhone app and stumbled upon [BioAid](http://bioaid.org.uk/).

BioAid is an app, implementing a full-featured hearing compensation algorithm, 
developed by a [team of scientists](http://bioaid.org.uk/contact.html) in the 
university of Essex. They themselves stress on the fact, that this is not about 
an iOS app, but the algorithm at the heart of it, which took years of research 
and continues to evolve today.

> Initially, the research was not concerned with hearing aids at all but with 
> the construction of computer models of how hearing works at a physiological 
> level in the auditory periphery.

However, the team has moved to working on hardware models and opted for mobile 
phones, since commercial hearing aids are almost impossible or too expensive to 
modify and require an agreement with the manufacturers, which is not that easy 
to obtain. Smartphones have everything, that a hearing aid needs (a mic, a 
processor and a speaker), they're compact enough and modern smartphones have 
sufficiently long battery life to perform on-the-fly sound processing almost 
all day. In my case it was a godsend and I rushed to test the app in everyday 
situations.


First thing I needed to do was to find the most suitable mode. For me it was 
simple since I've done million audiograms and knew that my hearing lacks some 
of the higher frequencies. After a quick scan I have found Gradual HF mode — 
the one I recognized at once as it reminded me of how all my aids sounded. My 
advice would be to start your scan with the first variants of every mode since 
some of the modes may be too loud or high in frequency and it's just unpleasant 
to learn it the worst way. Surprisingly, finding the right mode is not a 
problem at all. I was afraid the app would require audiograms and it would 
complicate things. It's definitely easier this way. Depending on the headphones 
(they have different levels and may alter the sound a little bit) I was best 
off with the 2nd and 3rd variants of Gradual HF mode.


I started testing the app in a park with lots of people walking, rolling and 
skating around. Although it was quite a test to start with I was pretty 
impressed with the results. It reminded me of times, when I put my first aid 
on. I heard everything happening around quite distinctly. Frequencies were 
altered in the right way. Sure iPhone headphones mic has its problems and I'm 
still hoping to find a better one, but other than that, I had no problems at 
all. It does reduce a little bit of background noise, depending on Gate value, 
however I wouldn't recommend setting it much higher than default settings as it 
may cripple the other, more critical sounds. The problem with the standard 
headphones mic boils down to missing out on sounds from behind or on the left 
(if you have the mic on your right side) occasionally, but it's not critical. 
However, if you're speaking with someone and the person is on the left — it may 
work a little less precisely than usually. The mic is also quite sensitive to 
wind and clothing rustle. Due to some lag you can't use Bluetooth headphones, 
though. This is an iPhone issue since people watching videos with Bluetooth 
headphones sometimes notice that too.

Usually, I wear my hearing aid in office, since it is the only place, where 
most of conversations are critical and may happen almost spontaneously. I was 
also quite satisfied. I heard everything said on meetings, even better, than 
with my previous aid, and decided to use BioAid at least temporarily at work. 
The only problem I can imagine is people's perception of wearing headphones all 
the time. Some people assume that you're listening to music. My office is quite 
liberal and modern since it's an IT company and a little Skype chat 
announcement worked, I can imagine, however, it couldn't always work this well. 
Me personally, I find headphones more aesthetically tolerable than a BTE aid, 
since people are almost constantly wearing headphones nowadays. Another problem 
is that you may need to buy a battery extender case or enhance the battery life 
of your iPhone in some other way. My battery is just enough to live through an 
usual working day, avoiding, if possible other uses of the phone. I only listen 
to some occasional music on my commute in the morning and after work. If I took 
the phone off charger at 8 in the morning it is usually almost dead by 22 after 
the full 8-hour day. Battery life is my biggest concern with the app so far. I 
had thought of getting a separate iPod Touch player and run the app there as 
professor Ray Meddis does in [this video](
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V_spE9JiUTg&).

Other minor flaw is that algorithm is implemented in mono, though in theory, 
stereo implementation is also possible. It is a problem since it may affect 
your perception of the direction, the sound is coming from. Even if it was 
processed as stereo, the iPhone standard headphones mic is mono, so the sound 
is mono by default. Perhaps, stereo would be even worse as a battery drain, so 
maybe it's OK the way it is. It is specific to iPhone implementation only and 
not the algorithm itself. Speaking about iPhone implementation, there are also 
some minor issues that complicate the workflow: like the app stopping on phone 
call and not resuming afterwards, or welcome screen appearing every time the 
app is launched, but all of these are solvable.

Still, for now I'm *not even thinking* of getting back to commercial aids. I 
have a very strong impression, that BioAid approach is the future of hearing 
aids. Especially for people, who don't have the hearing damage so severe, that 
they require deep in-canal aids or even implants, which is majority of people 
with hearing problems. Unloading the sound processing from the aid to a 
smartphone or similar device (iPod Touch?) may be the right way especially 
considering the fact, that going from nine to twelve channels adds up at least 
a thousand dollars to the price of the commercial aid and iPhone has enough 
computational power to process much more. Sure, there are still some problems, 
but most of them are of the implementation and are going to be fixed sooner or 
later.

Algorithm itself is entirely open-source, which means you can [fork](
https://github.com/audioplastic/BioAid) it on GitHub and create your own 
version, addressing all of the issues described above, or providing support for 
some other platform. If you're a hearing impaired person and you've decided to 
try [BioAid](http://bioaid.org.uk/) for yourself, don't forget to provide your 
[feedback](http://bioaid.org.uk/contact.html) to the research group, since it 
may turn out very useful to them.

**Update 14.11.2014**: I've written [another piece on BioAid](
http://wswld.net/2014/09/24/update-on-bioaid-and-my-hearing-in-general/) in a 
year's time, where I've reexamined most of my earlier observations and 
conclusions.
